+++
date = "14 Nov 2020"
draft = false
title = "DMP Requirements"
slug = "dmp"
+++

# Distinguished Major in Computer Science

Bachelor of Arts Computer Science majors who have completed 18 credit
hours towards their major may apply to the **Distinguished Majors
Program**. The DMP focuses on a creative student research project as
advised and approved by an advisor.

Students who are accepted must complete a report based on two
semesters of research. The Distinguished Majors Program features
opportunities for students and advisors to collaborate on creative
research; it is not a lock-step program with strict content
requirements, but an opportunity to work closely with a professor on a
project that is interesting and exciting to you.

Upon successful completion of the program, students will likely be
recommended for a baccalaureate award of _Distinction_, _High
Distinction_, or _Highest Distinction_. According to College rules, to
earn a Distinguished Major, students must have a cumulative GPA of 3.4
or better.

For more information on the DMP, contact the **DMP Director**:
David Evans (<a href="https://www.cs.virginia.edu/evans/office">https://www.cs.virginia.edu/evans/office</a>, <a
href="mailto:evans@virginia.edu">evans@virginia.edu</a>).

## Distinguished Majors Program Requirements

Students applying to the DMP must have completed 18 credit hours
towards their Computer Science major by the end of the semester in
which they apply. Students typically apply during the Spring semester
of their third year, but it is possible to apply earlier.

The 18 credit hours can can come from any course used to fulfill the
“Major Subject Requirements”, “Computing Electives” or “Integration
Electives” of the Interdisciplinary Major in Computer Science
Curriculum. (Exceptions to the 18 credit hours rule may be granted at
the discretion of the Distinguished Majors Program Director.)

In addition to the normal requirements for the computer science major,
they must register for two semesters of supervised research (CS 4998
for 3 credits each semester). Students may apply to the DMP before
completing this supervised research, but students must complete the
supervised research to complete the DMP. Based on their independent
research, students must complete, to the satisfaction of their advisor
and the Distinguished Major Program Director, a project at least one
month prior to graduation.

**Note:** The CS 4998 DMP credits do <em>not</em> apply towards the credit hours
required for the major. That is, they cannot be used to fulfill any
requirement listed on the BACS curriculum.

## Joining the DMP

**Application Deadline:** Students must apply by the third semester
prior to graduation. Spring graduates should submit their applications
in by **29 March** of the year before graduation. Winter graduates,
must have their applications in by **29 October** of the year before
the winter graduation. (If these deadlines are missed, students can
still join the DMP at the discrection of the DMP Director.)

Note that applying to the program occurs relatively early in the
research process. It is not necessary to have a fully formed research
idea to apply for the DMP, although it is expected that you have found
a research advisor to work with. It is not necessary to have a second
reader identified when you apply to join the DMP.

Students seeking to enter the DMP should complete the following steps:

**1. Find a research advisor.** Students must
work with a research advisor on their DMP project, and should work
with their research advisor to define a DMP project. The research
advisor is typically a member of the Computer Science faculty at
UVa. Exceptions to this may be granted at the discretion of the DMP
Director, and it is often suitable to have an advisor from outside UVA
or from another department. Students are expected to meet regularly
(typically every week or every other week) with their research advisor
throughout the course of the project.

Many students become involved in research well before the DMP
application process — some as early as their first semester at
UVA. The most important preparation for students interested in the DMP
is becoming involved in research early. Students are encouraged to
start early. It is not too early to start talking to professors about
research in your first semester, and one of the best ways to get
involved in a research group is to impress a professor with what you
do in class.

If you have an idea for a project you would like to do, but don't have
a research advisor, contact the DMP Director to meet to discuss the
areas you are interested in working in and for advice on finding a
potential advisor. It is a good idea to do this early, especially to
increase the likelihood you'll be able to find a summer research
position.

**2. Decide on a project and write a research proposal.**

The student and research advisor should discuss the proposed research
together, and work together to develop the research proposal.

The student should write a brief proposal for the project including a
(1) clear motivation for the work (why this problem is worth working
on and hasn't been solved yet), (2) a summary of related work, (3) a
description of what you plan to do and (4) how you will evaluate it. A
DMP project should be a <em>research</em> project that seeks to answer
some unknown research question; it is not enough to just build some
interesting software or study an area in depth. A DMP student should
work with her research advisor to develop the project proposal, and
the research advisor should review and agree to the proposal.

The project proposal need not be very detailed as long as the
essential elements are in place. There are no formal guidelines (e.g.,
length, format, etc.) for what constitutes an acceptable project, it
is up to the research advisor and the DMP Director to agree that a
proposed project is satisfactory. Our expectation is that most DMP
projects will result in a paper that could be published in a research
conference or workshop. Alternative goals could also be appropriate,
but should be discussed with the research advisor and DMP
director.

**3. Enlist a second reader.** (It is not necessary to do this before applying to the DMP)

DMP projects must have a _second reader_, who, in addition to the
research advisor and DMP director, will be responsible for evaluating
the project. The second reader agrees to read the DMP report and
provide an evaluation. In most cases, we hope the second reader will
also be involved in other phases of the work, providing additional
expertise to the DMP researcher.

Your research advisor may be able to help you find a second reader
based on your interests and your project proposal. It is not necessary
to have the second reader identified when you submit the DMP
application, but is important to find a suitable second reader early
in the research. The second reader should be a faculty member most
suited to assess the quality and context of your work. If appropriate,
the second readers can be a faculty member from another university or
from another department at UVA. However, CS faculty members are also
acceptable.

**4. Submit the DMP application form and proposal.**

Complete the <a href="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScjgTH1zWKb0B5yx2RizDS3A7SYwUKn5dFMDjOmsTVyfizAhQ/viewform?usp=sf_link"><b>DMP Application</b></a>.

The application includes a very brief (expected to be no more than one
page) research proposal describing your DMP project, which can be
submitted as either plaintext or an attached PDF file. After
submitting the form, you should receive a notification regarding
acceptance within one week (so feel free to follow-up with the DMP
Director, <a href="mailto:evans@virginia.edu">evans@virginia.edu</a>,
if you do not receive a response by then).

### Collaboration

In general, a Distinguished Majors Program project should be the
creative research output of a single DMP student, guided by faculty
advisors. In practice, students may, for example, work with a research
group or a graduate student in the completion of a project. The DMP
report should reflect and represent the student’s individual work, as
guided by faculty advisors. The extent to which collaborative work
(e.g., a peer-reviewed publication on which two students are
co-authors) should be included is left to the discretion of the
advisor and DMP Director. So long as the DMP student played an
important and clear role in creative aspects of the research and in
writing the paper, it is often appropriate to use a co-authored paper
as the DMP report, and not necessary to write a separate report from a
paper that is published or submitted to a research conference or
journal. Since the DMP designation is for individual students,
however, if the DMP report is a co-authored paper, it must be clear in
the research advisor's evaluation what the DMP student's role was and
how she contributed to the research and writing.

## Completing the DMP

To successfully complete the DMP, students must write a research paper
describing their work.

There are no specific length or formatting requirements for the DMP
paper, and it is up to the student and research advisor to decide on
this. In most cases, we recommend following the formatting and length
requirements of a Computer Science research conference. The research
advisor should specify any requirements for the DMP report, in
consultation with the DMP director for any unusual situations.

The DMP report must be completed and submitted at least thirty days
prior to graduation. For May 2021 graduation, the deadline is **12
April 2021** (this may be adjusted later once graduation details are
set, but will not be earlier).

DMP students should submit their DMP paper as both a PDF attachment to
an email to the DMP director (<a
href="mailto:evans@virginia.edu">evans@virginia.edu</a>), their
advisor and second reader, by the required deadline (30 days before
graduation). The DMP director will follow-up with the student's
advisor and second reader to obtain the necessary evaluations.

**Evaluation.** Students will usually receive a
recommendation for a baccalaureate award of <em>Distinction</em>,
<em>High Distinction</em> or <em>Highest Distinction</em> upon
successful completion of the DMP. The <em>Highest Distinction</em>
designation is reserved for work that is of sufficient quality and
importance to be published in a significant research venue. Eligible
students who complete the program receive baccalaureate awards based
on the Distinguished Majors Program Director’s assessment of their
thesis advisor and second reader evaluations. This award will be
visible on the student’s diploma.

Students who fall below a 3.4 cumulative GPA are not eligible to be
Distinguished Majors. The 3.4 cumulative GPA is a College of Arts and
Sciences school requirement, and it cannot be waived. There is no
penalty beyond not receiving the award for students who are no longer
eligible.

Reviews will be completed and the DMP Director's recommendation will
be sent to the Chair of the University Committee on Special Programs
two weeks before graduation.

			
